welcome to lecture 13 of statistical
rethinking
2023.
when I was a kid we were really into
books uh it was the early days of the
internet and I guess you know books were
pretty cool so at the library we used to
exchange these Choose Your Own Adventure
books when they came in lots of exciting
titles like mystery of the Maya island
of time cup of death
what was great about these books is that
well they were distracting and
entertaining but they're kind of book
where you get to choose branching pass
like the garden of forking pass a garden
of forking data from the first half of
the course
you reach a particular page and you're
given a choice and you choose which page
to turn to next and the story continues
from there
and many many stories are embedded in a
single book through this branching path
mechanism so for this particular book
the island of time this is its map and
there are 12 possible endings and from a
causal inference perspective these books
are relevant because you can explore
counter factuals see what would have
happened if you had done something else
this sort of thing we can never really
do in real data analysis
not all of these Adventures are as
simple as the previous one The Mystery
of the Maya for example has many many
more possible endings 39 in total many
other many branching decisions that lead
to those and the possibility of
returning to the start of various points
for looping pass a directed cyclic graph
if you will why am I talking about kids
books well
um in this course I encourage you to
follow this idea of drawing the Bayesian
owl that there's this five-step plan to
success where we start with a clearly
defined theoretical estimate then we use
that to sketch out some causal models
make them into real generative models
that can produce synthetic data and then
we use those two steps to build
statistical models through the logic
either of do calculus
or by expressing degenerative model
directly as a statistical model
then we need to test quality assurance
is necessary now we Sim use simulations
from the generative model to validate
the estimator and then only then are we
ready to analyze the real data
the disservice with this outline of
course is that you know just from the
course material and the homework
assignments that it's much more
complicated than this there are
branching paths it's not a straight line
from one to five there are lots of
little subjective decisions that have to
be made in between
uh it's much more like this the mystery
of the model and there are many many
possible endings more than 39 for sure
but reassuringly when you reach a bad
ending and your model doesn't work you
can return to the start and fix it and
those are the tools that is my
responsibility to teach you
and part of that is when drawing a real
owl for example there are many technical
skills involved in technical details
from the choice of pencil to how you
hold it
and everybody knows that in every art
form or
um
and the analogy in statistical modeling
are these little things about estimators
and coding them and making them run like
the partial pooling thing that I showed
you in the previous lecture last week
these are things that don't really
appear in the generative model typically
but if we leave them out we leave
information on the table we could do
better if we pick up that information
and incorporate it correctly
so I want to introduce you to your
multi-level Adventures the sorts of
branching pass that will lead you to
good estimation
um and from this point on in the course
I think the foundations are in place
once you've got the basics of partial
pooling you've got a really strong
foundation in advanced statistical
modeling and from there you can choose
to invest as little or as much as you
want in any particular sub area there's
no obligation to learn it all that's the
way I think of it is the discourse up to
the first multi-level modeling lecture
is a foundational thing that most
behavioral scientists and biological
scientists need and after that you
choose to specialize and so from here
I'd like to propose some some choices
some branching pass for all of you
who've been following along the lectures
or taking the course and the first of
course is to return to the start
start again from the first lecture come
back through take notes on what you
didn't understand the first time and
really reinforce your foundation because
that Foundation is the most important
thing and after you've repeated that
Foundation you'll feel much better
because you'll understand it much better
the second time through give you a warm
glow and then you'll be in a much better
position to decide what you want to do
next
you could also for the rest of this
course
skim and index what remains don't put
too much pressure on yourself just try
to learn to learn the details just sit
back be entertained see the kinds of
applications that are possible
index them in your mind so that if you
come across a research problem or you
need something like that you can come
back to this material and choose to go
in as deeply as you need to
um third you could pick and choose uh
you could skip over whole examples I
will not be offended and engage only
with those topics that interest you
because from here on out it's going to
get more specialized
um this lecture and the next are not too
specialized but they will get
increasingly specialized in the week
after and we'll look at topics like
social networks and phylogenies and it's
perfectly fine not to be interested in
those topics but if you are interested
in those topics then wait for those and
focus on those you don't you don't have
no obligation to focus on the other
pieces
um fourth option is what I call the
Bayesian flow which is what I've been
encouraging from the beginning try to
learn enough in each part just to keep
moving just to hang on and that's fine
you don't I think it's actually a bit
foolish to try to understand everything
on the first go but just enough to keep
moving so that you're learning a little
bit and then you can do it all again at
some point or better yet stop and engage
with your own research problems when you
feel ready and if you reach a stopping
point a block a wall in your own
research problems then you can come back
here and find some help
so the distinction that I need to
prepare you for so that you can Branch
out and choose your past is this
distinction between clusters and
features in multi-level models
and basically every kind of advanced
statistical model or machine learning
model is some kind of multi-level model
so this distinction is very useful no
matter what you end up doing later
so clusters are the groups the subgroups
in the data
um things like tanks uh in the tadpole
example stories and the trolley example
individuals also in the Charlie example
or in the tadpole example or departments
in the Berkeley admissions data example
these are subsets in which there are
multiple observations
and then there are features and these
are aspects of the model things we'd
like to estimate quite typically that
may vary by cluster
and
the way we program these different
things into the models is the thing you
want to get clear and so I'm going to do
another lecture
today which basically
repeats and gets a bit more involved in
the material from the previous lecture
so in a sense there's not going to be
anything new and yet I hope it feels
like it's a bit new because it's good to
reinforce this basic distinction and
understand what's going on and this will
give me an opportunity to start
introducing some of the
uh branching pass and in the mechanism
of really making this stuff work
um so in the Machinery when you choose
to add more clusters so often in a
particular problem there's not just one
kind of cluster that you want to
structure by not just tanks not just
stories but also individuals and and
other things maybe not just regions of
countries but countries themselves as
well
when you add more clusters to the data I
actually think this is the Least
Complicated thing you need more index
variables so it's just categorical
variables like before and you just need
to add population priors for each so
this is not the hard problem at all it's
just copying and pasting and renaming
parameters for the most part
adding features is where the subtlety
lies and that's what we're going to talk
about today
when you add features you add parameters
sometimes quite a lot of parameters
hundreds or thousands or tens of
thousands
and what this means is there are more
dimensions in each population prior
because there are more aspects of each
cluster which can vary and this leads to
additional complexity and additional
interpretation issues so I'm going to
slowly move through an example which
I'll build over this lecture and the
next to help you understand
this this engineering if you will and
why it's really useful for research
one of the things that helps me not get
too lost in the possible branching past
is to keep reminding myself what I'm
trying to do right this is step one of
drawing the owl
and varying effects for us are a way to
try to estimate unmeasured confounds
this is quite often what they're for
confounds in the soft sense of competing
causes or confounds in the hard sense of
common causes that are unobserved
so the varying effect strategy to remind
you is we have unmeasured features of
the Clusters we believe they exist or
they or we're worried that they exist
and these leave some imprint on the data
but we have multiple observations from
each cluster and this gives us the
possibility to actually estimate things
we have not measured
um
and the reason we use partial pooling is
because it gives us better estimates of
those things because it borrows
strengths from across the Clusters from
a predicted perspective this is
important because it gives us better
estimates it makes us more accurate in
our predictions it gives us
regularization
from a causal perspective there are
inferential threats
um the UN the things we have not
measured are the most terrifying things
but repeat observations within clusters
give us some hope
you've already seen some examples of
this uh think back to the introductory
causal inference lectures this example
of grandparents education of
grandparents influence on the education
of their own children and their
grandchildren and I introduced the idea
of this haunting that neighborhoods
induce shared exposures between parents
and their kids and this is a thing that
stops us from doing a mediation analysis
on this on on measuring the direct
effect of grandparents on their children
but if we have families in the same
neighborhoods and we have repeat
observations on those neighborhoods and
then we can use
estimation varying effects estimates to
estimate those unmeasured features of
neighborhoods potentially
in the trolley problem example
I ended that example by talking about
the fact that each individual had
responded to I think 30 different
trolley problems and individuals vary a
lot in how they make use of the
subjective scale and that adds a lot of
noise to the responses and this is a
competing cause if we could estimate
those individual features let's just
call it personality that affects how
reactive they are to the scale that
would help us get better estimates of
the treatment effects I think it's also
quite likely
in that particular experiment that these
individual features also affect
participation
and therefore those individual
unmeasured individual features may be a
confound and so it's even worse than
that yeah
that they're sampling bias through those
personality features
um a political science example so I had
a colleague back in California who was
really interested in why some countries
go to war and some governmental forms go
to war there's this there's this kind of
folks saying that democracies never go
to war against one another
um
and uh so you can imagine in a schematic
you've got this idea that you have some
time series and uh there are periods in
which different nations are Award with
one another and they have different
governmental forms G1 and G2 at that
time and you've measured some other
stuff about them like their economies
and and so on those are the X one and X2
variables of the of the countries one
and two and the problem in inference in
this which makes this a sort of
never-ending debate
is that there are lots of potentially
unmeasured things about Nations that can
influence all of these variables and
therefore are confounds
um things like their geography their
natural resources uh their cultural
history and so on
um and these are
things that we might be able to estimate
with repeat observations
so
the point of all these examples is to
say we're interested in varying effects
both from a predictive perspective
because they regularize a hand from a
causal inference perspective because
it's a chance for us to estimate
unobserved unmeasured confounds
there's an alternative approach called
the fixed effect approach if you watch
the one of the bonus rounds from last
week I described it there but if you
didn't very quickly fixed effects are
varying effects with
an infinite standard deviation and so
they don't do any pooling at all in
effect they use only the data from each
individual cluster to estimate features
of that cluster
uh this leads them to overfit yes but
they they have some advantages in
dealing with group level compounds as I
described in that bonus round
um
they have the disadvantage of not
allowing you uh to study uh cluster
level uh causes
uh
in the bonus round I I argued that there
are plenty of times when fixed effects
are fine in this lecture I'm going to
show you one of the reasons that in
realistic research with finite sample
sizes uh they're often quite impractical
and the good news is they don't offer
any unique benefits over over varying
effects we can deal with group level
compounds and varying effects as well as
I described in that bonus round
but in general
with all these terms flying around like
fixed effects and varying effects Don't
Panic
draw your assumptions make the
generative model and focus on that to
get your thinking straight first and
worrying about the worry about the
estimator later because most of the big
problems in research are about getting
the story straight yeah
okay lots of practical difficulties and
that's sort of what we're focusing on
here varying effects are great as a
default I often tell people that
um we shouldn't be making excuses to use
varying effects we should be making
excuses not to and sometimes there are
good excuses not to
um and sometimes it's the Practical
difficulties for example how do we use
more than one cluster at the same time
and as I told you you duplicate but it's
easier said than done in many cases you
need examples if you're going to make
progress there calculating predictions
with varying effects gets trickier
because now you have to talk about at
what level you're making predictions are
you making predictions for whole new
clusters or are you making predictions
for new elements inside of previously
experienced clusters and those are
really different kinds of predictions
I'm going to say that again because I
know this is weird
so imagine we were making a prediction
for a new tadpole in an existing context
that we had varying effect estimates for
that's a different kind of prediction
task than making predictions for new
unobserved tanks that tadpoles might
appear in yeah we need to use different
parameters from the models to make those
different kinds of predictions
and then there's just this issue of
drawing the owl how do we get the change
to sample efficiently and as you make
models more complicated this gets harder
but don't worry I am here you don't have
to go alone and I'll show you the tricks
uh fourth uh group level confounding
this is a real threat in models and it's
often ignored in the varying effects
literature uh it's something to really
think about and as I said in the bonus
round from last week I showed you one
effective way to deal with this that's
essentially equivalent to the fixed
effect approach
the example I want to stick with in this
lecture and the next is the 1989
Bangladesh fertility survey so
Bangladesh is a very densely populated
country and in the 1980s a typical woman
by the time she finished her
reproduction would have had seven or
eight kids I think that was the median
and these days it's around two
so there's been a radical demographic
change in the last decades
in Bangladesh as in many parts of the
world much of Asia and there are many
good reasons to study this change both
descriptively and causally descriptively
because countries need to understand
what's happening to them so that they
can plan appropriately and causally
because as human scientists we want to
understand why this happened
so I'm going to give you a relatively
modest data set here that's in the
rethinking package data Bangladesh it's
a
1934 women from 61 districts in
Bangladesh and Bangladesh's is a highly
variable place with cities and rural
areas and the outcome we're going to be
interested in is contraceptive use this
was a survey in the 1980s late 1980s of
contraceptive use when it was just being
heavily pushed by the by the government
we have some other variables we're going
to think about too just to make this
spicy the age of the woman that was
interviewed how many living children she
had at the time and whether the her
location within the district is urban or
rural
so lots of people request more advice
about how to draw Dax this is extremely
common so and my response is always well
you need domain expertise and that's
true but I think there are some
heuristics as well that can help so let
me let me try with this case to show you
how I would go about trying to trying to
draw a Jag with just these variables of
course there are other variables that
matter but Hang on we're going to get
there let's let's not punish ourselves
let's start simple so
the variables we're going to nominate so
far we've got contraceptive use that's
our outcome of Interest we've got the
age of the woman how many living kids
she has her vanity I'm calling it does
she live in an urban area or not uh or
in principle you could make that a
continuous variable how Urban is the
space or distance from an urban center
and then the district which is this
variable which is just an index but
remember
we're interested in it because it's
going to represent unmeasured things
about districts
that may affect all the women on all the
families within them
so first thing you do is focus on the
cause of Interest what are the causes of
Interest why are you doing this research
at all and in this case we're going to
think about the idea that we would like
to add minimum describe the association
between age and contraceptive use and uh
and and family size and contraceptive
use how many kids the woman has
and possibly even estimate causal
effects of these things although uh as
we'll as we'll see that's that's not so
easy to do
um then there are competing causes other
things that influence the outcome uh but
we're that we're not necessarily
directly interested in but that we may
want to stratify by so we can get better
estimates or deal with confounding so
naturally the district
May influence contraceptive use because
there may be many things about the
economy of a district or its resources
or its population density or its
cultural history which may also
influence the behavior of people in it
and then Urban spaces and Rural spaces
are quite different as well
um and then there are relationships
among those causes so in this case uh
age nothing influences age this is a
great thing about the variable age
nothing influences it because it's just
a clock and unless you have a time
machine you don't have an arrow into age
but age can influence other things like
how many kids you have the longer you've
been alive the more kids you can
possibly have right
and um
Urban living may also influence kids
because of the cost of them
and the district you're in again could
easily influence Urban living because
some districts don't have cities
yeah you could draw more arrows here I'm
not making a strong argument for this
particular diagram I'm trying to
stimulate your imagination but I think
these relationships are a plausible
start so that we can do something useful
and educational
there are also unfortunate relationships
you shouldn't just draw the stuff that's
easy for you imagine imagine the
haunting imagine the ghosts in the dark
so for example here's a group level
confound the unmeasured things about
districts may also influence features of
individuals in those districts not just
the group level variables like whether
there are cities so for example there
may be things about the history of
particular districts which influence
family size it could be the ethnic
composition of that district for example
um and then imagine stuff you haven't
measured that may also uh haunt you so
in this case uh um families can be quite
large and remember I said in the in
around 1980 a typical woman would have
had seven or eight kids so they're going
to be a bunch of sisters within a family
and they may be similar in contraceptive
use and their family sizes because of
common socialization this is another
kind of cluster variable but if we don't
have it in the data set
then it could be a confound
okay let's get started uh Don't Panic
we're going to start real simple and
build up one step at a time and we're
just going to think about building the
tadpole level version of this data set
and what I mean by that is we're just
going to Cluster by district and
describe the variation and contraceptive
use by district and this is already a
lot to do and there's lots of advanced
statistical Machinery already in this
so we don't need to push too much harder
until we've got this done and often when
you're doing a data analysis on a
structured data set like this this is
always the place to start get your
varying effect structure in place get it
to work right because there's often some
tinkering to do as I'll show you and
then worry about the causal effects uh
second but whatever you do never try to
go to the end point and put all of the
variables in you think you need you've
got to build it one step at a time
because something's not going to work
and if you've done it all at once you
won't know what's not working
one step at a time test and keep going
so our s demand is very modest right now
it's just contraceptive use in each
district and we're going to use partial
pooling and you'll see that's be
necessary for the survey because the
coverage is not very uniform and in some
districts there just isn't a lot of data
so we're going to estimate a varying
intercept on each district and this
really from my perspective is just
another chance to help you understand
partial pooling because let's face it
it's weird
here's the model we want this has the
same structure as the tadpole model from
last week
but still uh let's remember I want to
remind you of the pieces and what they
mean the first line This is the uh prior
for The observed outcome variable right
there's Bernoulli with some constant
rate P sub I or P sub I as a function of
the of the log odds parameter Alpha
which is the log odds of contraceptive
use in each district
and then we have our regularizing prior
for districts this is a prior with
parameters inside of it and that's the
third line of this model these are the
alpha J's
um and then Alpha bar is the average
District the law gods of contraceptive
using the average district and sigma is
the standard deviation among districts
here's the code this looks uh very much
like that the code from last week uh
however I want to call your attention to
just one thing
um and we'll get to it in a moment so
the top line is not new at all this is
our Bernoulli outcome a zero one outcome
for contraception because that's the way
it was recorded then we have our link
function logit for the probability and
we have a it's our log odds bracketed by
District D and then here's the new bit
I'm defining
the vector a not by bracketing with d
but by explicitly declaring its length
at 61. there are 61 districts in this
survey
but not all of them were surveyed and so
for some of them you don't have any data
and so if you bracket by D in that case
you're going to end up with an error and
I wanted to save you from that problem
but otherwise
it's all the same you've got a bar and
sigma inside the normal and then the
priors for those two parameters those
parameters are often called hyper
parameters hyper parameters are
parameters that determine other priors
uh it's a weird thing I know
and then Sigma exponential
run this model you will not encounter
any difficulties and it samples
extremely efficiently but you do get a
terrifying number of parameters as you
see it's not either 60 63 parameters in
this model it's really not that much
compared to things that we could do but
it's not the kind of thing you just
stare at the out at the coefficient
table and understand right as always we
need to push out predictions and
understand from the posterior
predictions what the model thinks
so the foreground that you have to
appreciate the variation in
in
the amount of sampling that was done in
each district some of the districts
there are as almost 120 women sampled
like District One
and in other districts there are very
few like District three I think that's
two women sampled in District three
District 49 has three women for example
and poor District 54 has none they're
definitely women living in District 54
but none of them wanted to talk to a
fertility researcher
this variation is the sort of situation
where partial pooling is a huge help
because there's much more evidence for
some districts and so we can be very
confident about estimates there but
there's much less in others
so let's think about posterior
predictions and I'm going to layer them
on let's here's the raw data these
blacks excuse me black circles
are calculated just by taking the number
of women who reported using
contraception in each district to the
districts are arranged on the horizontal
axis from 1 to 61
and dividing that by the number of women
who responded at all uh in in each
district and then you get a proportion
reporting and that's what these black
circles are
um
as you can see for example that in
District three all of the women who
responded which I think is two reported
using contraception
and then we put on the posterior means
for each district these are the partial
pooling estimates uh just the posterior
means of for each and as you should
expect by now just like in the tadpole
example they're shrunk towards the mean
that's the effect of of pooling
information across districts districts
that don't have a lot of data get pooled
more and then here are 89 percent
posterior intervals to give you an idea
that there's uncertainty about these we
don't know the mean right there's still
a lot of uncertainty in each of these
cases
and um
want to spend a little bit of time
studying this graph so you understand uh
what we call shrinkage last time why
some of these estimates have moved are
some of the red circles which are the
posterior means are very far away from
the black circles which are the
empirical means and others are right on
top yeah and this has to do with well
you guessed it how much data there is in
each district
so let's take some interesting cases
here and just label the sample sizes so
they're starting on the left for
district three only two women responded
that's where that 2 is on the black
circle and you'll see that the model is
not fooled by this it is not at all
confident
that all women in District 3 use
contraception right it would be a
foolish model if you thought so
yeah however if you used a fixed effects
model that's what it would think
and then on moving from left to right
we've got some districts with really low
reported use uh 10 and 11 and they all
they have modest sample sizes as well
and their estimates are shrunk towards
the mean so the model does not think
that almost no one uses contraception in
those districts again for there's a low
one has 14 observations there in the
middle and all the way far on the right
you'll see the ones at the bottom
District 49 only four women and
and then one with six and one with ten
I've highlighted also a couple districts
that have large sample sizes and have
sort of pulled their District level
estimates up above the mean and you'll
see those labeled with the 35 sample
size and the 45 sample size a bit more
women in those districts use
contraception than is typical in
Bangladesh in 1989 but the model has
been has agreed to be pulled up because
there's more weight of evidence in those
cases
okay the point here is just to
understand that all of this is logical
right the model is just following the
logic the probability Theory and doing
what's necessary and that's why the
shrinkage happens and it's also why
sometimes it doesn't
interesting case is this District right
over here and you'll notice there's no
black dot in this column where I've
marked no data because that's the
district I think it was 49 where there's
um no data at all so not 49 must be 50
something 54 something like that where
there's no data at all nevertheless
there's a posterior distribution for it
yeah remember the minimum sample size
for Bayesian analysis is zero because
you have a prior
in this case
this is an informed prior because it's
been estimated from all the other
districts and so that estimate the
posterior mean at the red circle and the
89 interval
for the district where we have no data
is in his in essence a prediction that
comes from that has been educated by the
data from all the other districts but
but it's not it it's not that it thinks
that this District must be like uh all
the other districts it uses the
variation as well because remember we're
estimating that Sigma parameter the
variance among districts and that's why
it's a bit wider as you can see than the
typical District the the pink band is
wider than it is for most other
districts
okay that's partial pooling and it uh
after a while you get really used to it
and you come to expect it and one of the
funny things about it of course is that
it's a reason that we um don't expect uh
the model to we don't want the model
predictions to exactly recapitulate the
sample I'll say that again we don't
usually want the posterior predictions
of the model to exactly recapitulate the
sample because remember there are
features of the sample which are not
regular
and we're trying to regularize
so that's why we use this approach
note we have done no inference yet so we
can think about that next
what about Urban living
Urban spaces impose different economic
costs some people and crowding and there
are cultural effects of urban living as
well and opportunities for labor which
compete with reproduction and so on
there are many many theories about this
but typically urban populations have
smaller family sizes and greater uptick
of contraception than rural populations
so let's take a look at this is it can
we at least describe the association
between urban living and Bangladesh
Bangladesh in 1989 and contraceptive use
and and maybe squint really hard at it
and convince ourselves it's a causal
effect
um the issue here right away is that
District features our potential group
level compounds different districts have
different levels of Urban Development
and so we need to um also stratify by
district and we want those varying
effects in place
um
ideally we'd uh use the munlock machine
that I talked about before but I don't
want to over complicate this example so
if you're interested in that you can go
back to that bonus round and and take a
look
the total effect of
of U or variable U which indicates how
Urban uh the place where the woman lives
passes also through K Kids uh in my dag
you see that it's got a direct effect
and an indirect effect
um so this is just a reminder you don't
want to just throw everything into the
same model you got to think about which
estimate you're using and only use the
right adjustments after that if you did
stratify by kids you would block part
perhaps most of the causal effect of
urban living
here's the model
there's a lot of choices about how to
parameterize this and I'm going to
choose one that I think is is the most
broadly useful because it's a structure
that lots of people use when they make
these sorts of models and that is to add
a slope if you will so you sub I in the
data set I've given you is is an
indicator variable it's zero when the
woman does not live in a city and it's
one when she does and we're going to
have a coefficient in front of that
indicator uh Beta And there's going to
be a different beta for each district
yeah so it's a whole new Vector of
parameters because we're going to let
the effective Urban living vary
so the variable use of I effectively
just turns on beta on different lines
for different women depending upon
whether they live in a city or not
nothing changes for Alpha sub J we add
beta sub J it's the same kind of
structure we've got a beta bar which is
the mean effect of urban living
for across districts and then a scale
parameter tau is that weird cute looking
T there and tau is just like Sigma it
just has a different name
so uh Alpha sub J is is the regularizing
prior for Rural beta sub J is the
regularizing prior for the urban effect
it's the difference between rural and
urban uh contraception rates on logout
scale within a particular District J
and then we have the averages and the
standard deviations as before
so in a sense it's it's the same model
we've just got some duplication and
renaming that's been done and the code
shows that I think quite clearly we have
another Vector of Link 61 but it's named
B and it's got its own mean and standard
deviation
okay when you run this
not all is well you're likely to get
some scary messages like this warning
four of 2000 transitions ended with the
Divergence and then there's a link never
a good sign uh warning three or four
chains had an e bfmi whatever that means
less than 0.2 is that good it sounds bad
there's a word warning in front and
again there's a link never a good sign
what's gone wrong here
well actually the Markov chain is is
fine in this particular case but it's
worth paying attention to These Warnings
because there's a way to fix them and
when you fix them you'll have a lot more
confidence uh that the estimates are
good and it'll take less time to get
them it'll make it more efficient
if you look at the pricey output for
this model you'll see that the NF the
effective sample size and the r hats are
not great especially for Tau Tau has a I
mean we took 2 000 samples here
um and tau's effective sample size is 45
and that sounds bad and it's our hat is
way above one
um
so if you look at the trace plot and the
tranq plot these are unhealthy chains
yeah
now if you run this model long enough
you're you're going to get uh the right
posterior distribution in this
particular case but in some cases when
you see warnings like this no matter how
long you run the model it's not going to
fix it so it's worth taking a little bit
of time to figure out how to recode the
model actually
so that it runs better
but let's do that after a break
go back and review the first half of
this think about your branching pass
again maybe go find a copy of a Choose
Your Own Adventure book read it through
and come back whenever you feel like it
I will still be here
[Music]
foreign
welcome back
so before the break I'd introduced this
idea that we could fix the problems with
the Markov chain in the in the
Bangladesh model that includes Urban
versus rural
and the trick for doing it is going to
seem weird I'm just going to tell you
right now
and I'm not even going to explain why it
works in any deep way but at the end of
this week I'll do a bonus round to
explain the details in more depth I
promise now but for now I want to keep
moving so we have a good flow and you
can get the top level Concepts instead
so the problem in this particular model
arises from the fact that there are
priors inside of priors that is that we
have parameters that Define the shape of
the priors for other parameters
there's nothing wrong with this in fact
it's essential for making varying
intercepts work
but it can be challenging to sample
because it creates awkward spaces for
hamiltonian Monte Carlo to cruise around
in
this kind of Prior where parameters
appear inside
the prior for other parameters like the
prior shown in red on the screen are
called centered priors the idea is that
there are parameters which Center them
or locate them in particular places
but we can re-express this exact
mathematical statistical estimator
without centering the priors
here's the idea I just want to give you
the intuition so
there's this thing called a z-score now
z-score is a standardized gaussian
deviation you can calculate it for many
thanks sample from a gaussian
distribution by subtracting the mean of
that distribution and then dividing by
the standard deviation so this formula
on the screen Z or Z if you prefer sub J
is equal to Alpha sub J minus Alpha bar
so we're taking the particular value
Alpha sub J and subtracting the mean and
then we divide
uh the remainder by Sigma
and that's called the z-score it's a
deviation in a standardized normal
distribution it's used in a bunch of
statistical tests
you can do this with any normal
distribution it's a perfectly harmless
transformation you can always reverse it
in fact to reverse it you just use this
formula Alpha sub J is Alpha bar plus
the z-score for that J times Sigma and
then you're right back on the original
scale
so we can use this trick to do all of
the posterior updating on the z-scores
and what's nice about that is it's the
z-scores don't have any parameters
inside them because they're normal 0 1
in the prior I'll say that again we can
use this trick to re-express this model
so that the hamiltonian Monte Carlo
doesn't have to move around inside the
distribution of alpha sub J it just has
to move around inside the distribution
of z alpha sub Alpha comma J and that
has no parameters in it it's it has no
hyper priors
but it's the same model I know this is a
super weird trick but it it works
so we re-expressed the model in the
so-called non-centered version on the
right of this screen these two models
are the same model
they are mathematically identical but
when you use them in your computer to do
markup chain Monte Carlo they're not
equivalent they reach the same answer
eventually but the one on the right is a
lot more efficient
so let's code the model that way the
code looks worse because it's got some
extra lines but it's much more efficient
the only thing to note here is I have
expressed these deterministic
relationships for the alpha vector and
beta vector
same length and I put save in front of
them so that we get them back in the
posterior distribution even though
they're not true parameters because
they're strictly functions of the other
parameters Alpha bar beta Bar Z sub
Alpha and Z sub beta and sigma and Tau
in this model samples much better
and again
the less efficient model works you just
would have to run it much longer to have
the same confidence in the posterior
samples you get
okay I know this is a strange trip and
it's just a weird fact about scientific
research as in art that there's a bunch
of technical stuff that's really
annoying that you have to deal with to
make things work and get the final
beautiful product and that's what this
non-centering trick is like if you run
you build your varying effects model
based upon scientific principles and
interests some desired estimate and then
you have to wrestle with a Markov chain
like this glass blower has to wrestle
with all the details of melting
temperature and ovens and putting things
together in the right way and and how
much lead is in the class and so on
uh but there's just no way of to avoid
that if you want the beautiful in
product you have to deal with the
technical monsters in between
and that's what this varying effects
trick is like there are other things
about estimation and finite samples
which are similarly just not what we got
into this business for but in the end
it's all worth it
okay and this is what we get
now we have I'm repeating that same kind
of structured plot from before where I'm
showing the posterior predictive
distributions for each district and now
I'm splitting it by rural and urban
so in the top plot we have rural all the
districts are are arrayed from 1 to 61
on the horizontal axis and then
probability of using contraception on
the vertical
and this is not the same plot as before
because we've taken we've taken out the
urban districts
and then on the bottom we have the urban
districts the same sort of plot shown in
blue but only the urban parts of each
district
there's a lot of complexity here and a
lot to investigate and we're not going
to try to just deal they're not going to
try to analyze this in too much detail
just a few things I want to point out
first let me label the really extreme
empirical values the the black dots with
their sample sizes like I did before
this is the the action of partial
pooling and there's a couple things to
note here
um this is another chance to appreciate
how partial cooling works the cases
where the sample sizes are small you get
a bigger difference between the red
circle and the black circle because
there's more shrinkage towards the mean
because there's less evidence in that
particular District so you'll see like
in the top plot where you get sample
sizes of four or seven or six there's a
greater distance between the posterior
mean in red and the raw empirical
mean in Black
same as true on the bottom we have even
more extreme small sample sizes on the
bottom a number of districts where
there's only two or three women from
urban areas because those districts
aren't very Urban they only have small
towns in them really
and this illustrates another Factor
about partial pooling is that as you
begin to cut up a data set by
stratifying by various predictors and
you will need to because you have some
particular s demand in mind
uh you're going to get smaller sample
sizes in each unit and in that case
partial pooling becomes increasingly
valuable because the shrinkage guards
against overfitting
yeah
the overall result here uh you probably
appreciated already
is that there's more contraceptive use
often a lot more in urban areas but
there's also a lot of variation in the
urban areas and it sort of seems like
from eyeballing it there's more
variation
across urban areas of districts
than there is across rural areas of
District
is to say on average women living in
urban areas are used contraception more
but they also vary more
so we can take a look at the sigma and
Tau parameters for these effects for
these features and that's what I've done
here in the bottom half of this slide
these are the posterior distributions
for the sigma and Tau that is the
standard deviations
of the of rates of use across rural
areas in red and urban areas in blue and
then I've I've added the prior here this
is something I often like to do in my
own projects is superimposed to Prior
for particular distribution to make sure
that the data did some work at all right
you want to see some uh you want to see
the posterior move from the prior uh so
what's going on here as you can see is
that actually there are many there's a
very wide range of standard deviations
consistent with Urban and many of them
are quite large
there's much more evidence about what's
going on in rural areas
so this is not a confident assertion
that there's more variation across urban
areas because there's just less data
from urban areas from Bangladesh in 1989
it wasn't very Urban at the time
uh uh and you want to think of this as
another example of the case where
sometimes what the posterior
distribution tells you is that it
doesn't know uh how much variation there
is and that's what you're seeing in the
urban area it could be consistent with
low or high or the same as rural
okay a final thing to say about this as
a bridge to the next lecture
um
a more natural way perhaps to plot these
posterior predictions is to have a graph
like the one on the screen where the
x-axis is the probability of
contraceptive use in a rural area
and the vertical is the probability of
contraceptive use in the urban area and
each point is a district yeah so the
horizontal axis is computed using the
alphas and the vertical axis is computed
using the alphas plus the the betas for
each district and what I've shown you so
far is just the posterior means and
those dashed lines that intersect there
are showing you the 50 on each axis
so to the left we have less than half of
women using contraception to the right
uh we have more and above the midpoint
line we also have more than 50 using so
the first thing to appreciate of course
is what you saw on the previous slides
is that there's more contraceptive use
in urban areas
okay the other thing though that's
revealed now that was quite hard to see
in the previous slides is that there's a
strong positive correlation between
contraceptive use
in both rural and urban areas within a
district
yeah you see that I'll say that again
there's a strong positive correlation
between contraceptive use in the rural
and urban areas within each district
yeah and that's why this uh this cloud
of points goes up to the right
and that correlation is extra
information that we have not exploited
in any particular way
I'm going to show you it's also a
feature of the uncertainty about these
points so what I'm going to do next is
impose the whole posterior Distribution
on here in the form of these 50
compatibility regions this is not a
beautiful plot I know but what are these
These are uh 50 compatibility regions of
the joint uncertainties from The Joint
posterior distribution of the alphas and
Alpha plus betas in each district just
to show you that they also tilt up and
to the right there's a correlation in
the uncertainty of them as well
uh this is a little easier to appreciate
if we just sub sample down to about six
of them and you can see it better here
this correlation both in the posterior
means and the whole posterior
distributions of these parameters Alpha
and beta is information that we can use
to make even better estimates actually
but I'm going to leave that story for
the next lecture because it's a bit
involved but but the good news is
there's more information on the table
and we can do even better with tinkering
with the Machinery using the right
pencils to draw the out
okay to summarize
um what I've tried to show you here is
examples of how to develop additional
features into a multi-level model and
how to think about begin to think about
the covariation among those features so
in this case the features are rural
versus Urban within each district and in
the next lecture I'm going to show you
how to do some get some extra value out
of the joint uncertainty in the features
okay we're in week seven week seven
we're doing a yet more multi-level
models and this will be a launching
point to keep going forward into special
topics that use these estimation
Technologies in future weeks and I'll
see you next time
[Music]
foreign